\n== AGARWAL2010 p138 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
125
 
 
The objective of architectural design is also to control the relationship between 
modules. One module may control another module or may be controlled by 
another module. These characteristics are defined by the fan-in and fan-out of a 
particular module. The organization of a module can be represented by a tree-like 
structure.
 
 
The number of levels of a component in the structure is called depth and the 
number of components across the horizontal section is called width. The number 
of components, which controls the component, is called fan-in, i.e., the number of 
incoming edges to a component. The number of components that are controlled by 
the module is called fan-out, i.e., the number of outgoing edges.
FIGURE 5.7 Fan-in and Fan-out
 
 
S0 controls three components, hence, the fan-out is 3. S2 is controlled by two 
components, namely, S1 and S2, hence, the fan-in is 2 (see Figure 5.7).
5.3 
LOW-LEVEL DESIGN 
5.3.1 
Modularization
 
A system is considered modular if it consists of discreet components so that each 
component can be implemented separately, and a change to one component has 
minimal impact on other components.
 
 
There are many definitions of the term module.  They range from “a module is 
a FORTRAN subroutine” to “a module is an ADA package” to “a module is a work 
assignment for an individual programmer.” All of these definitions are correct, in 
the sense that modular systems incorporate collections of abstractions in which 
each functional abstraction, each data abstraction, and each control abstraction 
handles a local aspect of the problem being solved. Modular system consists of 
well-defined, manageable units with well-defined interfaces among the units. 
Desirable properties of a modular system include: 
 
 Each function in each abstraction has a single, well-defined purpose. 
 
 Each function manipulates no more than one major data structure.

\n== AGARWAL2010 p139 ==\n126 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
 
 Functions share global data selectively. It is easy to identify all routines 
that share a major data structure. 
 
 Functions that manipulate instances of abstract data types are encapsulated 
with the data structure being manipulated. 
 
 
Modularity enhances design clarity, which in turn eases implementation, 
debugging, testing, documenting, and maintenance of the software product. 
 
 
Modules that may be created during program modularizations are: 
 
 Process support modules: In these all the functions and data items that are 
required to support a particular business process are grouped together. 
 
 Data abstraction modules: These are abstract types that are created by 
associating data with processing components. 
 
 Functional modules: In these all the functions that carry out similar or 
closely related tasks are grouped together. 
 
 Hardware modules: In these all the functions, which control particular 
hardware are grouped together. 
 
Classification of Modules
 
A module can be classified into three types depending on the activating 
mechanism.
 
 An incremental module is activated by an interruption and can be interrupted 
by another interrupt during the execution prior to completion. 
 
 A sequential module is a module that is referenced by another module and 
without interruption of any external software. 
 
 Parallel modules are executed in parallel with other modules.
 
 
The main purpose of modularity is that it allows the principle of separation 
of concerns to be applied in two phases: when dealing with the details of each 
module in isolation (and ignoring the details of other modules) and when dealing 
with the overall characteristics of all modules and their relationships in order to 
integrate them into a coherent system. If the two phases are temporally executed 
in the order mentioned, then we say that the system is designed bottom-up; the 
converse denotes top-down design. 
 
Advantages of Modular Systems
 
 Modular systems are easier to understand and explain because their parts are 
functionally independent.
 
 Modular systems are easier to document because each part can be documented 
as an independent unit.
 
 Programming individual modules is easier because the programmer can focus 
on just one small, simple problem rather than a large complex problem.

\n== AGARWAL2010 p140 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
127
 
 Testing and debugging individual modules is easier because they can be dealt 
with in isolation from the rest of the program.
 
 Bugs are easier to isolate and understand, and they can be fixed without fear 
of introducing problems outside the module.
 
 Well-composed modules are more reusable because they are more likely to 
comprise part of a solution to many problems. Also, a good module should be 
easy to extract from one program and insert into another. 
 
 
Modularity is an important property of most engineering processes and 
products. For example, in the automobile industry, the construction of cars proceeds 
by assembling building blocks that are designed and built separately. Furthermore, 
parts are often reused from model to model, perhaps after minor changes. Most 
industrial processes are essentially modular, made out of work packages that are 
combined in simple ways (sequentially or overlapping) to achieve the desired 
result. 
5.3.2 Structure Charts
 
The structure chart is one of the most commonly used methods for system design. 
Structure charts are used during architectural design to document hierarchical 
structures, parameters, and interconnections in a system. 
 
 
It partitions a system into black boxes. A black box means that functionality is 
known to the user without the knowledge of internal design. Inputs are given to 
a black box and appropriate outputs are generated by the black box. This concept 
reduces complexity because details are hidden from those who have no need or 
desire to know. Thus, systems are easy to construct and easy to maintain. Here, black 
boxes are arranged in hierarchical format as shown in Figures 5.8 (a) and (b).
FIGURE 5.8 (a) Hierarchical Format of a Structure Chart

\n== AGARWAL2010 p141 ==\n128 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
FIGURE 5.8 (b) Format of a Structure Chart
 
 
Modules at the top level call the modules at the lower level. The connections 
between modules are represented by lines between the rectangular boxes. The 
components are generally read from top to bottom, left to right. Modules are 
numbered in a hierarchical numbering scheme. In any structure chart there is one 
and only one module at the top called the root. 
 
Basic Building Blocks of a Structure Chart
 
The basic building blocks of a structure chart are the following:  
 
1. Rectangular Boxes. A rectangular box represents a module. Usually a 
rectangular box is annotated with the name of the module it represents. 
 
2. Arrows. An arrow connecting two modules implies that during program 
execution, control is passed from one module to the other in the direction of 
the connecting arrow. 
 
3. Data-flow Arrows. Data-flow arrows represent that the named data passes 
from one module to the other in the direction of the arrow.
 
4. Library Modules. Library modules are the frequently called modules and are 
usually represented by a rectangle with double edges. Usually when a module 
is invoked by many other modules, it is made into a library module.

\n== AGARWAL2010 p142 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
129
 
5. Selection. The diamond symbol represents that one module out of several 
modules connected with the diamond symbol are invoked depending on the 
condition satisfied, which is written in the diamond symbol.
 
6. Repetitions. A loop around the control-flow arrows denotes that the respective 
modules are invoked repeatedly. 
 
 
Example 5.1. A software system called RMS calculating software reads 
three integral numbers from the user in the range between –1000 and +1000 and 
determines the root mean square (rms) of the three input numbers and then 
displays it. 
FIGURE 5.9 Structure Chart For Example 5.1

\n== AGARWAL2010 p143 ==\n130 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
5.3.3 Pseudo-Code
 
“Pseudo” means imitation or false and “code” refers to the instructions written in a 
programming language. Pseudo-code notation can be used in both the preliminary 
and detailed design phases. Using pseudo-code, the designer describes system 
characteristics using short, concise English language phrases that are structured 
by keywords, such as If-Then-Else, While-Do, and End. Keywords and indentation 
describe the flow of control, while the English phrases describe processing actions. 
Pseudo-code is also known as program-design language or structured English. A 
program-design language should have the following characteristics:  
 
 A fixed syntax of keywords that provide for all structured constructs, data 
declarations, and modularity characteristics.
 
 A free syntax of natural language that describes a processing feature.
 
 A data-declaration facility. 
 
 A subprogram definition and calling techniques.
 
Advantages of Pseudo-Code
 
The various advantages of pseudo-code are as follows:  
 
 Converting a pseudo-code to a programming language is much easier compared 
to converting a flowchart or decision table.
 
 Compared to a flowchart, it is easier to modify the pseudo-code of program 
logic whenever program modifications are necessary.
 
 Writing of pseudo-code involves much less time and effort than the equivalent 
flowchart. 
 
 Pseudo-code is easier to write than writing a program in a programming 
language because pseudo-code as a method has only a few rules to follow.
 
Disadvantages of Pseudo-Code
 
The various disadvantages of pseudo-code are as follows:  
 
 In the case of pseudo-code, a graphic representation of program logic is not 
available as with flowcharts.
 
 There are no standard rules to follow in using pseudo-code. Different pro-
grammers use their own style of writing pseudo-code and hence communication 
problems occur due to lack of standardization.
 
 For a beginner, it is more difficult to follow the logic or write the pseudo-code 
as compared to flowcharting.

\n== AGARWAL2010 p144 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
131
 
The use of pseudo-code for detailed design specification is illustrated in 
Figure 5.9 (a).
 
INITIALIZE tables and counters; OPEN files
 
READ the first text record
 
WHILE there are more text records DO
 
WHILE there are more words in the text record DO
 
EXTRACT the next word
 
SEARCH word_table for the extracted word
 
IF the extracted word is found THEN
 
INCREMENT the extracted word’s occurrence count
 
ELSE
 
INSERT the extracted word into the word_table
 
ENDIF
 
INCREMENT the words_processed counter
 
ENDWHILE at the end of the text record
 
ENDWHILE when all text records have been processed
 
PRINT the word_table and the words_processed counter
 
CLOSE files
 
TERMINATE the program
FIGURE 5.9 (a) An Example of a Pseudo-Code Design Specification
 
 
Pseudo-code consists of English-like statements describing an algorithm. It 
is written using simple phrases and avoids cryptic symbols. It is independent of 
high-level languages and is a very good means of expressing an algorithm. It is 
written in a structured manner and indentation is used to increase clarity. 
5.3.4 Flowcharts 
 
A flowchart is a convenient technique to represent the flow of control in a program. 
A flowchart is a pictorial representation of an algorithm that uses symbols to show 
the operations and decisions to be followed by a computer in solving a problem. 
The actual instructions are written within symbols/boxes using clear statements. 
These boxes are connected by solid lines having arrow marks to indicate the flow 
of operation in a sequence.
 
 
In fact, flowcharts are the plan to be followed when the program is written. 
Expert programmers may write programs without drawing the flowcharts. 
But for a beginner it is recommended that a flowchart should be drawn before 
writing a program, which in turn will reduce the number of errors and omissions 

\n== AGARWAL2010 p145 ==\n132 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
in the program. Flowcharts also help during testing and modifications in the 
programs.
 
Flowchart Symbols 
 
1. Terminal Symbol. Terminal symbols are used for two purposes: to define the 
starting (START or BEGIN) point of the flowchart and to define the ending 
point (END) of the flowchart.
 
2. Input/Output Symbol. Input/output symbols are used to indicate the logical 
positioning of input/output operations. The input operation is the entry of 
computer data and the output operation is the displayed output operation. 
 
3. Processing Symbol. Processing symbols are used to indicate the arithmetic and 
data-movement instructions. Therefore, all arithmetic processing of adding, 
subtracting, multiplying, and dividing are represented with a processing 
symbol box. 
 
4. Decision Symbol. Decision symbols have one entry point and there will be 
at least two exit points depending upon the decision taken inside the symbol. 
When a condition is tested, if the condition is true, the path for “yes” is 
followed. If the condition is false, the path for “no” is followed.
 
5. Flow Lines. Flow lines, which have arrowheads, are used to indicate the flow 
of program logic in a flowchart. These arrows are used to indicate the direction 
of the flow of control. This means these statements indicate the next statement 
to be executed. 

\n== AGARWAL2010 p146 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
133
 
6. Connector Symbol. If a flowchart is discontinued at some point and continued 
again in another place, the connector symbol is used. It is a circle with a number 
written inside it. If a flowchart is discontinued at some point, a circle is drawn 
pointing away from the chart. Another circle with the same number inside is 
placed where the flowchart is continued. 
 
7. Hexagon (Flat). This is the preparation box. This box contains the loop-setting 
statement, i.e., some iterative statement.
 
Flowchart Drawing Rules
 
Important rules and guidelines used for drawing flowcharts are:  
 
 Only conventional flowchart symbols should be used.
 
 Arrows can be used to indicate the flow of control in the problem. However, 
flow lines should not cross each other.
 
 Processing logic should flow from top to bottom and from left to right. 
 
 Words in the flowchart symbols should be common statements and easy to 
understand. These should be independent of programming languages.
 
 Be consistent in using names and variables in the flowchart. 
 
 If the flowchart becomes large and complex then connector symbols should be 
used to avoid crossing of flow lines.
 
 Properly labeled connectors should be used to link the portions of the flowchart 
on different pages.
 
 Flowcharts should have start and stop points.

\n== AGARWAL2010 p147 ==\n134 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
 
Advantages of Flowcharts
 
The various advantages of flowcharts are as follows:  
 
 Synthesis. Flowcharts are used as working models in designing new programs 
and software systems.
 
 Documentation. Program documentation consists of activities, such as collecting, 
organizing, storing, and maintaining all related records of a program. 
 
 Coding. Flowcharts guide the programmer in writing the actual code in a high-
level language, which is supposed to give an error-free program developed 
expeditiously. 
 
 Debugguing. The errors in a program are detected only after its execution on 
a computer. These errors are called bugs and the process of removing these 
errors is called debugging. In the debugging process, a flowchart acts as an 
important tool in detecting, locating, and removing bugs from a program.
 
 Communication. A flowchart is a pictorial representation of a program. 
Therefore, it is an excellent communication technique to explain the logic of a 
program to other programmers/people.
 
 Analysis. Effective analysis of a logical problem can be easily done with the 
help of a related flowchart. 
 
 Testing. A flowchart is an important tool in the hands of a programmer, which 
helps him in designing the test data for systematic testing of programs. 
 
Limitations of Flowcharts
 
The various limitations of flowcharts are as follows:  
 
 The drawing of flowcharts is a very time-consuming process and laborious 
especially for large, complex problems. 
 
 The redrawing of flowcharts is even more difficult and time consuming. It is 
very difficult to include any new step in the existing flowchart; redrawing of 
the flowchart is the only solution. 
 
 There are no standards, which specify the detail that should be included in 
any flowchart.
 
 If an algorithm has complex branches and loops, flowcharts become very 
difficult to draw.
 
 Sometimes flowcharts are not as detailed as desired. 
 
Example of a Flowchart
 
As an example, consider an algorithm to find the average of n numbers. The 
flowchart is shown in Figure 5.10 followed by the algorithm. Here n is the integer 

\n== AGARWAL2010 p148 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
135
variable denoting the number of values considered for computing the average. 
Count is another integer variable denoting the number of values that are processed 
at any instant. The number is an integer variable for storing the values.
FIGURE 5.10 Flowchart to Find the Average of n Numbers

\n== AGARWAL2010 p149 ==\n136 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
5.3.5 Difference Between Flowcharts and Structure Charts
 
A structure chart differs from a flowchart in the following ways:  
 
 It is usually difficult to identify different modules of the software from its 
flowchart representation. 
 
 Data interchange among different modules is not represented in a flowchart.
 
 Sequential ordering of tasks inherent in a flowchart is suppressed in a structure 
chart. 
 
 A structure chart has no decision boxes.
 
 
Unlike flowcharts, structure charts show how different modules within a 
program interact and the data that is passed between them.
5.4 
COUPLING AND COHESION 
5.4.1 
Coupling
 
The coupling between two modules indicates the degree of interdependence 
between them. If two modules interchange a large amount of data, then they are 
highly interdependent. The degree of coupling between two modules depends on 
their interface complexity. The interface complexity is basically determined by the 
number of types of parameters that are interchanged while invoking the functions 
of the module.
 
 
Highly Coupled: When the modules are highly dependent on each other then 
they are called highly coupled.
 
 
Loosely Coupled: When the modules are dependent on each other but the 
interconnection among them is weak then they are called loosely coupled.
FIGURE 5.11 Coupling

\n== AGARWAL2010 p150 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
137
 
 
Uncoupled: When the different modules have no interconnection among them 
then they are called uncoupled modules.
 
Factors Affecting Coupling Between Modules
 
The various factors which affect the coupling between modules are depicted in 
Table 5.1. 
TABLE 5.1 Factors Affecting Coupling
Interface Complexity
Type of Connection
Type of Communication
Low
Simple Obvious
To module by name
Data
High
Complicated Obscure
To internal elements 
ControlHybrid
 
Types of Couplings
 
Different types of couplings include content, common, external, control, stamp, 
and data. The strength of a coupling from the lowest coupling (best) to the highest 
coupling (worst) is given in Figure 5.12.
FIGURE 5.12 The Types of Module Coupling
 
1. Data Coupling. Two modules are data coupled if they communicate using 
an elementary data item that is passed as a parameter between the two; for 
example, an integer, a float, a character, etc. This data item should be problem 
related and not used for a control purpose.
FIGURE 5.13 Data Coupling
