
===== AGARWAL2010 pg149 =====
136 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
5.3.5 Difference Between Flowcharts and Structure Charts
 
A structure chart differs from a flowchart in the following ways:  
 
 It is usually difficult to identify different modules of the software from its 
flowchart representation. 
 
 Data interchange among different modules is not represented in a flowchart.
 
 Sequential ordering of tasks inherent in a flowchart is suppressed in a structure 
chart. 
 
 A structure chart has no decision boxes.
 
 
Unlike flowcharts, structure charts show how different modules within a 
program interact and the data that is passed between them.
5.4 
COUPLING AND COHESION 
5.4.1 
Coupling
 
The coupling between two modules indicates the degree of interdependence 
between them. If two modules interchange a large amount of data, then they are 
highly interdependent. The degree of coupling between two modules depends on 
their interface complexity. The interface complexity is basically determined by the 
number of types of parameters that are interchanged while invoking the functions 
of the module.
 
 
Highly Coupled: When the modules are highly dependent on each other then 
they are called highly coupled.
 
 
Loosely Coupled: When the modules are dependent on each other but the 
interconnection among them is weak then they are called loosely coupled.
FIGURE 5.11 Coupling


===== AGARWAL2010 pg150 =====
 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
137
 
 
Uncoupled: When the different modules have no interconnection among them 
then they are called uncoupled modules.
 
Factors Affecting Coupling Between Modules
 
The various factors which affect the coupling between modules are depicted in 
Table 5.1. 
TABLE 5.1 Factors Affecting Coupling
Interface Complexity
Type of Connection
Type of Communication
Low
Simple Obvious
To module by name
Data
High
Complicated Obscure
To internal elements 
ControlHybrid
 
Types of Couplings
 
Different types of couplings include content, common, external, control, stamp, 
and data. The strength of a coupling from the lowest coupling (best) to the highest 
coupling (worst) is given in Figure 5.12.
FIGURE 5.12 The Types of Module Coupling
 
1. Data Coupling. Two modules are data coupled if they communicate using 
an elementary data item that is passed as a parameter between the two; for 
example, an integer, a float, a character, etc. This data item should be problem 
related and not used for a control purpose.
FIGURE 5.13 Data Coupling


===== AGARWAL2010 pg151 =====
138 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
 
 When a non-global variable is passed to a module, modules are called data 
coupled. It is the lowest form of a coupling. For example, passing the variable 
from one module in C and receiving the variable by value (i.e., call by value).
 
2. Stamp Coupling. Two modules are stamp coupled if they communicate using 
a composite data item, such as a record, structure, object, etc. When a module 
passes a non-global data structure or an entire structure to another module, 
they are said to be stamp coupled. For example, passing a record in PASCAL 
or a structure variable in C or an object in C++ language to a module.
 
3. Control Coupling. Control coupling exists between two modules if data from 
one module is used to direct the order of instruction execution in another. An 
example of control coupling is a flag set in one module that is tested in another 
module.
FIGURE 5.14  Control Coupling
 
 The sending module must know a great deal about the inner workings of the 
receiving module. A variable that controls decisions in subordinate module C 
is set in super-ordinate module A and then passed to C.
 
4. External Coupling. It occurs when modules are tied to an environment 
external to software. External coupling is essential but should be limited to a 
small number of modules with structures. 
 
5. Common Coupling. Two modules are common coupled if they share some 
global data items (e.g., Global variables). Diagnosing problems in structures 
with considerable common coupling is time-consuming and difficult. 
However, this does not mean that the use of global data is necessarily “bad.” It 
does mean that a software designer must be aware of potential consequences 
of common couplings and take special care to guard against them. 
 
6. Content Coupling. Content coupling exists between two modules if their 
code is shared; for example, a branch from one module into another module. 
It is when one module directly refers to the inner workings of another 
module. Modules are highly interdependent on each other. It is the highest 
form of coupling. It is also the least desirable coupling as one component 
actually modifies another and thereby the modified component is completely 
dependent on the modifying one.


===== AGARWAL2010 pg152 =====
 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
139
FIGURE 5.15 Couplings
 
 
High coupling among modules not only makes a design difficult to understand 
and maintain, but it also increases development effort as the modules having high 
coupling cannot be developed independently by different team members. Modules 
having high coupling are difficult to implement and debug.
5.4.2 Cohesion
 
Cohesion is a measure of the relative functional strength of a module. The cohesion 
of a component is a measure of the closeness of the relationships between 
its components. A cohesive module performs a single task within a software 
procedure, requiring little interaction with procedures being performed in other 
parts of a program.
 
 
A strongly cohesive module implements functionality that is related to one 
feature of the solution and requires little or no interaction with other modules. 
This is shown in Figure 5.16. Cohesion may be viewed as the glue that keeps the 
module together. It is a measure of the mutual officity of the components of a 
module.
FIGURE 5.16 Cohesion-strength of Relation within Modules
 
 
Thus, we want to maximize the interaction within a module. Hence, an 
important design objective is to maximize the module cohesion and minimize the 
module coupling. 


===== AGARWAL2010 pg153 =====
140 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
 
Types of Cohesion
FIGURE 5.17 The Types of Module Cohesion
 
There are seven levels of cohesion in decreasing order of desirability, which are as 
follows:
 
1. Functional Cohesion. Functional cohesion is said to exist if different elements of 
a module cooperate to achieve a single function (e.g., managing an employee’s 
payroll). When a module displays functional cohesion, and if we are asked to 
describe what the module does, we can describe it using a single sentence.
FUNCTION A Part 1
FUNCTION A Part 2
FUNCTION A Part 3
FIGURE 5.18 Functional Cohesion: Sequential with Complete, 
Related Functions
 
2. Sequential Cohesion. A module is said to possess sequential cohesion if the 
elements of a module form the parts of a sequence, where the output from one 
element of the sequence is input to the next.
FIGURE 5.19 Sequential Cohesion: Output of One Part is Input to Next
 
3. Communicational Cohesion. A module is said to have communicational 
cohesion if all the functions of the module refer to or update the same data 


===== AGARWAL2010 pg154 =====
 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
141
structure; for example, the set of functions defined on an array or a stack. 
All the modules in communicational cohesion are bound tightly because they 
operate on the same input or output data. For example, the set of functions 
defined on an array or a stack.
FIGURE 5.20 Communicational Cohesion: Access Same Data
 
4. Procedural Cohesion. A module is said to possess procedural cohesion if the 
set of functions of the module are all part of a procedure (algorithm) in which 
a certain sequence of steps has to be carried out for achieving an objective; for 
example, the algorithm for decoding a message.
FUNCTION A 
FUNCTION B
FUNCTION C
FIGURE 5.21 Procedural Cohesion Related by Order of Function
 
5. Temporal Cohesion. When a module contains functions that are related by 
the fact that all the functions must be executed in the same time span, the 
module is said to exhibit temporal cohesion. The set of functions responsible 
for initialization, start-up, shutdown of some process, etc., exhibit temporal 
cohesion.
TIME TO
TIME TO+A
TIME TO+2A
FIGURE 5.22 Temporal Cohesion Related by Time
 
6. Logical Cohesion. A module is said to be logically cohesive if all elements 
of the module perform similar operations; for example, error handling, data 
input, data output, etc. An example of logical cohesion is the case where a 


===== AGARWAL2010 pg155 =====
142 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
set of print functions generating different output reports are arranged into a 
single module.
FIGURE 5.23 Logical Cohesion Similar Functions
 
7. Coincidental Cohesion. A module is said to have coincidental cohesion if it 
performs a set of tasks that relate to each other very loosely. In this case, the 
module contains a random collection of functions. It means that the functions 
have been put in the module out of pure coincidence without any thought or 
design. It is the worst type of cohesion.
FIGURE 5.24 Coincidental Cohesion Parts Unrelated
FIGURE 5.25 Cohesion
5.4.3 Relationship Between Coupling and Cohesion
 
A software engineer must design the modules with the goal of high cohesion and 
low coupling.


===== AGARWAL2010 pg156 =====
 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
143
 
 
A good example of a system that has high cohesion and low coupling is the 
‘plug and play’ feature of a computer system. Various slots in the motherboard of 
the system simply facilitate to add or remove the various services/functionalities 
without affecting the entire system. This is because the add-on components provide 
the services in a highly cohesive manner. Figure 5.26 provides a graphical review 
of cohesion and coupling.
FIGURE 5.26 View of Cohesion and Coupling
 
 
Module design with high cohesion and low coupling characterizes a module 
as a black box when the entire structure of the system is described. Each module 
can be dealt with separately when the module functionality is described. 
5.5 
FUNCTIONAL-ORIENTED VERSUS THE OBJECT-ORIENTED 
APPROACH
 
Some of the differences between the functional-oriented and the object-oriented 
approaches, which are very indispensable, are described in Table 5.2.
TABLE 5.2
S. No.
Functional-oriented Approach
Object-oriented Approach
1.
In the functional-oriented design 
approach, the basic abstractions, 
which are given to the user, are real-
world functions, such as sort, merge, 
track, display, etc.
In the object-oriented design approach, 
the basic abstractions are not the 
real-world functions, but are the data 
abstraction where the real-world entities 
are represented, such as picture, machine, 
radar system, customer, student, employee, 
etc.


===== AGARWAL2010 pg157 =====
144 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
2.
In function-oriented design, functions 
are grouped together by which a 
higher-level function is obtained. An 
example of this technique is SA/SD.
In this design, the functions are grouped 
together on the basis of the data they 
operate on, such as in class person, function 
displays are made member functions to 
operate on its data members such as the 
person name, age, etc. 
3.
In 
this 
approach, 
the 
state 
information is often represented in a 
centralized shared memory.
In this approach, the state information 
is not represented in a centralized shared 
memory but is implemented/distributed 
among the objects of the system.
5.6 
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
 
Design specifications address different aspects of the design model and are 
completed as the designer refines his representation of the software. First, the 
overall scope of the design effort is described, which is derived from system 
specification and the analysis model (software requirements specification).
 
 
Then, data design is specified, which includes data structures, any external file 
structures, internal data structures, and a cross-reference that connects data objects 
to specific files. 
 
 
Then architectural design indicates how the program architecture has been 
derived from the analysis model. Structure charts are used to represent the module 
hierarchy.
 
 
Interface design indicates the design of external and internal program interfaces 
along with a detailed design of the human/machine interface. A detailed prototype 
of a GUI may also be represented.
 
 
Procedural design specifies components—separately addressable elements of 
software—such as subroutines, functions, or procedures in the form of English-
language processing narratives. This narrative explains the procedural function of 
a component (module).
 
 
Design specification contains a requirements cross-reference. The purpose of 
this cross-reference is: 
 
 To establish that all requirements are satisfied by the software design.
 
 To indicate which components are critical to the implementation of specific 
requirements.
 
 
The final section of the design specification contains supplementary data, 
such as algorithm descriptions, alternative procedures, tabular data, excerpts from 


===== AGARWAL2010 pg158 =====
 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
145
other documents, and other relevant information presented as a special note or a 
separate appendix.
TABLE 5.3
System objective
Human-machine interface
Major software requirements design
Constraints, limitations
Data design
Data 
objects 
and 
resultant 
data 
structures
File and database structures
External file structures
Logical structures
Specification and design
External interface design
Interfaces to external/systems
Internal design rules
Processing narrative
Interface description
Design language description
Modules used
Access method
Global data
File and data cross-reference
Data structures used
Comments
Requirements cross-reference
5.7 
VERIFICATION FOR DESIGN
 
The output of the system design phase, such as the output of other phases in the 
development process, should be verified before proceeding with the activities of 
the next phase. If the design is expressed in some formal notation for which analysis 
tools are available, then through tools it can be checked for internal consistency 
(e.g., those modules used by another are defined, the interface of a module is 
consistent with the way others use it, data usage is consistent with declaration, 
etc.). If the design is not specified in a formal, executable language, it cannot be 
processed through tools, and other means for verification have to be used. 
 
 
There are two fundamental approaches to verification. The first consists of 
experimenting with the behavior of a product to see whether the product performs 
as expected (i.e., testing the product). The other consists of analyzing the product—
or any design documentation related to it—to deduce its correct operation as a 
logical consequence of the design decisions. The two categories of verification 
techniques are also classified as dynamic or static, since the former requires—by 
definition—executing the system to be verified, while the latter does not. Not 
surprisingly, the two techniques turn out to be nicely complementary. 


===== AGARWAL2010 pg159 =====
146 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
5.8 
MONITORING AND CONTROL FOR DESIGN
 
Software project management is crucial to the success of a project. The basic task 
is to plan the detailed implementation of the development process to ensure that 
the cost and quality objectives are met. It specifies what is needed to meet the 
cost, quality, and schedule objectives. For this purpose we need monitoring and 
control. Monitoring obtains information from the development process and exerts 
the required control over it. Figure 5.27 shows where monitoring and control is 
carried out in project management:
FIGURE 5.27 Phases of Project Management
 
 
Monitoring and control systems are an important class of a real-time system. 
They check sensors and provide information about the system’s environment and 
take actions depending on the sensor reading. Monitoring systems take action 
when some exceptional sensor value is detected. Control systems continuously 
control hardware actuators depending on the value of associated sensors. 
 
 
Consider the following example: A burglar alarm system is to be implemented 
for a building. This uses several different types of sensors. These include movement 
detectors in individual rooms, window sensors on ground floor windows, which 
detect if a window has been broken, and door sensors, which detect a door 
opening on corridor doors. There are 50 window sensors, 30 door sensors, and 200 
movement detectors in the system.
 
 
When a sensor detects the presence of an intruder, the system automatically 
calls the local police and, using a voice synthesizer, reports the location of the 
alarm. It switches on lights in the rooms around the active sensor and sets off an 
audible alarm. The alarm system is normally powered by the main power source 
but is equipped with a battery backup. Power loss is detected using a separate 
power circuit monitor that monitors the main voltage. It interrupts the alarm 
system when a voltage drop is detected.


===== AGARWAL2010 pg160 =====
 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
147
EXERCISES
 
1. What is system design?
 
2. Explain, in detail, the three design principles in system design.
 
3. What is abstraction? What are the verification metrics for system design?
 
4. Define:
 
(i) Problem partitioning
 
(ii) Abstraction
 
(iii) Top-down and bottom-up design
 
5. Define architectural design.
 
6. What are the objectives of architectural design?
 
7. Explain the various design techniques that come under the category of low-level 
design.
 
8. Define:
 
(i) Modularization 
(ii) Structure charts
 
(iii) Pseudo-code 
(iv) Flowcharts 
 
9. Give any two important differences between the function-oriented and object-oriented 
design approaches.
 
10. Discuss the major advantages of the object-oriented design approach over the function-
oriented design approach.
 
11. What is a flowchart? Explain some of its symbols. Also give a suitable example. 
 
12. Give the hierarchical format of a structure chart. Also, give the basic building blocks of 
a structure chart.
 
13. Explain the term design specification. 
 
14. Discuss the term verification in reference to system design.
 
15. Enumerate the term monitoring and control in system design.
 
16. Discuss some methods of monitoring and control of a software-development process.
 
17. What is meant by the term coupling in software design? Is it true that in a good design, 
the modules should have low coupling? Why?
 
18. Explain the different types of coupling that two modules might exhibit.
 
19. Explain the different types of cohesion that a module might exhibit.
 
20. What is coupling and cohesion in reference to software design? How are these concepts 
useful in arriving at a good design of a system?
 
21. Is it true that whenever we increase the cohesion of different modules in our design, 
coupling between these modules automatically decreases? Justify your answer with 
the help of an appropriate example.
 
22. What is a flowchart? How is the flow-charting technique useful for software 
development?
 
23. Discuss the major advantages of the object-oriented design (OOD) methodology over 
the data flow-oriented design methodologies.


===== AGARWAL2010 pg161 =====
4 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING


===== AGARWAL2010 pg162 =====
Chapter 6
SOFTWARE MEASUREMENT
AND METRICS
6.1 
 SOFTWARE METRICS
 
S
oftware metrics are quantifiable measures that could be used to measure different 
characteristics of a software system or the software-development process.
 
 
Metrics and measurements are necessary aspects of managing a software- 
development project. For effective monitoring, management needs to get information 
about the project: how far it has progressed, how much development has taken 
place, how far behind schedule it is, and the quality of the development so far. 
Based on this information, decisions can be made about the project. Without 
proper metrics to quantify the required information, subjective opinion would 
have to be used, which is often unreliable and goes against the fundamental goals 
of engineering. Hence, we can say that metrics-based management is also a key 
component in the software-engineering strategy to achieve its objectives.
6.1.1 Definition
 
Software metrics can be defined as “The continuous application of measurement-based 
techniques to the software-development process and its products to supply meaningful and 
149


===== AGARWAL2010 pg163 =====
150 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
timely management information, together with the use of those techniques to improve that 
process and its products.”
 
 
Metrics ensure that the final product is of high quality and the productivity 
of the project stays high. In this sequence metrics for intermediate products of 
requirements and design is to predict or get some idea about the metrics of the final 
product. Several metrics have been designed for coding; namely, size, complexity, 
style, and reliability.
6.1.2  Categories of Metrics 
 
There are three categories of software metrics, which are as follows:
 
1.  Product Metrics. Product metrics describe the characteristics of the product, 
such as size, complexity, design features, performance, efficiency, reliability, 
portability, etc.
 
2.  Process Metrics. Process metrics describe the effectiveness and quality of the 
processes that produce the software product. Examples are:
 
 Effort required in the process
 
 Time to produce the product 
 
 Effectiveness of defect removal during development
 
 Number of defects found during testing
 
 Maturity of the process
 
3.  Project Metrics. Project metrics describe the project characteristics and 
execution. Examples are: 
 
 Number of software developers
 
 Staffing pattern over the life-cycle of the software
 
 Cost and schedule
 
 Productivity
6.1.3 
Attributes of Effective Software Metrics
 
Hundreds of metrics have been proposed for computer software, but not all 
provide practical support to the software engineer. Some demand measurement 
that is too complex, others are so esoteric that few real-world professionals have 
any hope of understanding them, and others violate the basic intuitive notions of 
what high-quality software really is. 
 
 
Ejiogu defines a set of attributes that should be encompassed by effective 
software metrics. The derived metric and the measures that lead to it should be:


===== AGARWAL2010 pg164 =====
 
SOFTWARE MEASUREMENT AND METRICS 
151
 
 Simple and computable: It should be relatively easy to learn how to derive the 
metric, and its computation should not demand inordinate effort or time.
 
 Empirically and intuitively persuasive: The metrics should satisfy the engineer’s 
intuitive notions about the product attribute under consideration. 
 
 Consistent and objective: The metric should always yield results that are 
unambiguous. 
 
 Consistent in the use of units and dimensions: The mathematical computation of 
the metric should use measures that do not lead to bizarre combinations of 
units.
 
 Programming-language independent: Metrics should be based on the analysis 
model, the design model, or the structure of the program itself. 
 
 An effective mechanism for high-quality feedback: That is, the metric should lead to 
a higher-quality end product. 
6.2 
 HALSTEAD’S SOFTWARE SCIENCE
 
Software science is an approach—based on Halstead’s theories—measuring 
software qualities on the basis of objective code measures. It is based on information 
theory, which in turn is based on the following measurable quantities, defined for 
a given program coded in any programming language:
 
 1, the number of unique, distinct operators appearing in the program;
 
 2, the number of unique, distinct operands appearing in the program;
 
 N1, the total number of occurrences of operators in the program;
 
 N2, the total number of occurrences of operands in the program.
 
 
The terms “operator” and “operand” have intuitive meanings and are to be 
defined for different programming languages. The distinction is that the operator 
works on the operand.
 
 
Once we have defined 1 and 2 precisely, we can define the program 
vocabulary  and the program length N as
 
 
 = 1 + 2
 
and
 
 
N = N1 + N2.
 
 
At this point, we can already consider some relations between the above 
quantities. A first obvious relation is
 
 
1 < =  N.


===== AGARWAL2010 pg165 =====
152 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
 
 
Using these definitions, Halstead suggests the equation
 
 
Ñ = 1 log2 1 + 2 log2 2,
 
where the “hat” has been placed on N to distinguish the quantity obtained, the 
calculated length, with this equation from the value of the length N obtained by 
direct observation.
 
 
We decided to quote Halstead’s reasoning directly since, in spite of its intuitive 
attractiveness, it suffers from flaws that make it questionable. The major flaw is 
that a program is not a “single ordered set of n [distinct!] elements,” but a string, 
with possible repetitions.
 
 
Disregarding this observation, Ñ is an estimate of the length of the program 
and not actual measured value of the length of the program. So, when we compare 
Ñ versus N on the same sample codes or programs our published algorithms 
shows (N  Ñ)/N is less than 10%.
 
 
Program level ‘L’ is a measure of the ‘Level of abstraction’ of the formulation 
of an algorithm. Another important measure Halstead’s theory introduces is the 
effort ‘E’ defined as
 
 
Effort = E = V .
L 
 
 
Halstead argues that E may be interpreted as the number of mental 
discriminations required to implement a program and also as the effort required 
to read and understand the program.
 
 
In conclusion, Halstead’s theory tries to provide a formal definition for such 
qualitative, empirical, and subjective software qualities as program complexity, 
eases of understanding, and level of abstraction, based on the count of some low-
level quantities, such as the number of operators and operands appearing in a 
program. The goal is to be able to predict the level of these qualities a program will 
have before the start of a project and then measure the level mechanically to assess 
the quality of the resulting product.
 
 
Example 6.1. Table 6.1 illustrates a simple Fortran routine and the associated 
values of N1, N2, n1, and n2. Halstead defines several quantities using these 
numbers. For example, program length N is defined as N1 + N2; (N1 + N2 = 50 in 
Table 6.1).
 
 
Halstead’s estimator of program length is:
 
 
N = n1 log2 n1 + n2 log2 n2.
 
 
For example, in Table 6.1
 
 
 N  = 10 (3.2) + 7 (2.8)  
 
 
 = 52.9.


===== AGARWAL2010 pg166 =====
 
SOFTWARE MEASUREMENT AND METRICS 
153
 
 
Program volume is defined as
 
 
V = (N1 + N2) log2 (n1 + n2).
 
Subroutine sort(X, N)
 
Dimension X(N)
 
If (N, I.T. 2) RETURN
 
  Do 20 I  = 2, N
 
  Do 10 J = 1, 1
 
IF (X (1), GE X (J)) GOTO 10
 
  SAVE  = X (I)
 
  X (I)  = X (J)
 
  X (J)  = SAVE
 
10 continue
 
20 continue
 
RETURN
 
END
TABLE 6.1 Operator and Operand Count for a Fortran Routine
 
 Operand
Count
 Operator
 Count
1 X
6
1 End of statement
7
2 I
5
2 Array subscript
6
3 J
4
3 =
5
4 N
2
4 Lf ()
2
5 2
2
5 DO
2
6 save
2
6
2
n2 = 7 I
1
7 End of program
1
22 = N2
8. LT.
1
3. GE.
1
n1 = 10 goto 10
1
28 = N1
 
and language level (the level of language abstraction) is
 
 
L = (2*n2)/(n1*N2).
 
 Program effort is defined as  V ;
L
 
 
E = (n1*N2*(N1 + N2)*log2 (n1 + n2)) / (2*n2).


===== AGARWAL2010 pg167 =====
154 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
 
 
Program effort is interpreted to be the number of mental discriminations 
required to implement the program. Alternatively, it can be interpreted as the effort 
required for reading and understanding a program. Experiments have shown that 
Halstead’s effort metric is well-correlated with the observed effort required to 
debug and modify small programs. Program effort thus appears to be a measure 
of interest for software maintenance.
6.3 
 FUNCTION-POINT BASED MEASURES
6.3.1 
Function Points
 
Function points and feature points are methods of estimating the “amount 
of functionality” required for a program, and are thus used to estimate project 
completion time. The basic idea involves counting inputs, outputs, and other 
features of a description of functionality.
6.3.2 Function-Point Metric
 
The function-point metric was proposed by Allan Albrecht (1983) when he worked 
for IBM. Function-oriented software metrics use a measure of the functionality 
delivered by the application as a normalization value. Since functionality cannot 
be measured directly, it must be derived indirectly using other direct measures. 
Function points are derived using an empirical relationship based on direct 
measures of the software’s information domain and assessments of software 
complexity.
 
 
Function points are computed by completing Table 6.2.
   TABLE 6.2 Function-Point Contribution of an Element
Function type
Simple
Average
Complex
External input
3
4
6
External output
4
5
7
Logical internal file
7
10
15
External interface file
5
7
10
External inquiry
3
4
6
 
 
The different function types mentioned in Table 6.2 are discussed as follows:  
 
 External types are input transactions that update internal computer files.
 
 External output types are transactions where data is output to the user. 
Typically, these would be printed reports.


===== AGARWAL2010 pg168 =====
 
SOFTWARE MEASUREMENT AND METRICS 
155
 
  Logical internal file types are the standing files used by the system. The 
term ‘file’ does not sit easily with modern information systems. It refers to 
a group of data that is usually accessed together. It might be made up of 
one or more record types. 
 
 External interface file types allow for output and input that might pass to 
and from other computer applications. 
 
 External inquiry types note the U.S. spelling of inquiry and are transactions 
initiated by the user that provide information but do not update the 
internal files. The user inputs some information that directs the system to 
the details required.
6.3.3 Special Features 
 
 The function-point approach is independent of the language, tools, or 
methodologies used for implementation, i.e., they do not take into consideration 
programming languages, database-management systems, processing hardware, 
or any other database technology. 
 
 Function points can be estimated from requirement specifications or design 
specifications, thus making it possible to estimate development effort in early 
phases of development.
 
 Function points are directly linked to the statement of requirements; any 
change of requirements can easily be followed by the estimate.
 
 Function points are based on the system user’s external view of the system; 
non-technical users of the software system have a better understanding of 
what function points are measuring. 
6.3.4  Advantages of Function Points
 
 Are not restricted to code.
 
 Are language independent. 
 
 The necessary data is available early in a project and thus only a detailed 
specification is needed.
 
 Are more accurate than estimated LOC.
 
 Can be used to easily estimate the size of a software product directly from the 
problem specification. 
6.3.5  Drawbacks of Function Points
 
 Subjective counting—different people can come up with different estimates 
for the same problem.
