\n== AGARWAL2010 p131 ==\n118 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
 
 
According to Webster. In a sense, design is representation of an object being created. 
A design information base that describes aspects of this object, and the design process can 
be viewed as successive elaboration of representations, such as adding more information or 
even backtracking and exploring alternatives.
 
 
According to Stevens. Software Design is the process of inventing and selecting 
programs that meet the objectives for software systems. 
 
 
Input includes an understanding of the following:
 
 Requirements
 
 Environmental constraints
 
 Design criteria
 
 
The output of the design effort is composed of the following:  
 
 Architecture design which shows how pieces are interrelated
 
 Specifications for any new pieces
 
 Definitions for any new data
5.1.2 
Design Objectives/Properties
 
The various desirable properties or objectives of software design are:
 
1. Correctness. The design of a system is correct if the system built precisely 
according to the design satisfies the requirements of that system. Clearly, 
the goal during the design phase is to produce correct designs. However, 
correctness is not the sole criterion during the design phase, as there can be 
many correct designs. The goal of the design process is not simply to produce 
a design for the system. Instead, the goal is to find the best possible design 
within the limitations imposed by the requirements and the physical and 
social environment in which the system will operate.
 
2. Verifiability. Design should be correct and it should be verified for correctness. 
Verifiability is concerned with how easily the correctness of the design can be 
checked. Various verification techniques should be easily applied to design. 
 
3. Completeness. Completeness requires that all the different components of 
the design should be verified, i.e., all the relevant data structures, modules, 
external interfaces, and module interconnections are specified.
 
4. Traceability. Traceability is an important property that can get design 
verification. It requires that the entire design element be traceable to the 
requirements.
 
5. Efficiency. Efficiency of any system is concerned with the proper use of 
scarce resources by the system. The need for efficiency arises due to cost 

\n== AGARWAL2010 p132 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
119
considerations. If  some resources are scarce and expensive, it is desirable that 
those resources be used  efficiently. In computer systems, the resources that 
are most often considered for efficiency are processor time and memory. An 
efficient system consumes less processor time and memory.
 
6. Simplicity. Simplicity is perhaps the most important quality criteria for 
software systems. Maintenance of a software system is usually quite expensive. 
The design of the system is one of the most important factors affecting the 
maintainability of the system.
5.1.3 
Design Principles
 
The three design principles are as follows:  
 
 Problem partitioning
 
 Abstraction
 
 Top-down and Bottom-up design
 
1. Problem Partitioning. When solving a small problem, the entire problem can 
be tackled at once. For solving larger problems, the basic principle is the time-
tested principle of “divide and conquer.” This principle suggests dividing into 
smaller pieces, so that each piece can be conquered separately. 
 
 For software design, therefore, the goal is to divide the problem into 
manageably small pieces that can be solved separately. The basic rationale 
behind this strategy is the belief that if the pieces of a problem are solvable 
separately, the cost of solving the entire problem is more than the sum of the 
cost of solving all the pieces.
 
 However, the different pieces cannot be entirely independent of each other 
as they together form the system. The different pieces have to cooperate and 
communicate to solve the larger problem. This communication adds complexity, 
which arises due to partitioning and may not have existed in the original 
problem. As the number of components increases, the cost of partitioning, 
together with the cost of this added complexity, may become more than the 
savings achieved by partitioning. It is at this point that no further partitioning 
needs to be done. The designer has to make the judgment about when to stop 
partitioning. 
 
 Problem partitioning can be divided into two categories:  
 
(i) Horizontal partitioning
 
(ii) Vertical partitioning
 
(i) Horizontal Partitioning. Horizontal partitioning defines separate branches 
of modular hierarchy for each major program function. The simplest 

\n== AGARWAL2010 p133 ==\n120 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
approach to horizontal partitioning defines three partitions: input, data 
transformation (often called processing), and output. Partitioning their 
architecture horizontally provides a number of distinct benefits:
 
 Software that is easier to test.
 
 Software that is easier to maintain.
 
 Software that is easier to extend.
 
 Propagation of fewer side effects.
 
 Conversely, horizontal partitioning often causes more data to be passed 
across module interfaces and can complicate the overall control of program 
flow.
FIGURE 5.1 Horizontal Partitioning
 
(ii) Vertical Partitioning. Vertical partitioning, often called factoring, suggests 
that control and work should be distributed from top-down in the program 
structure. Top-level modules should perform control functions and do 
actual processing work. Modules that reside low in the structure should 
be the workers, performing all input, compilation, and output tasks.
FIGURE 5.2  Vertical Partitioning

\n== AGARWAL2010 p134 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
121
 
2. Abstraction. An abstraction of a component describes the external behavior of 
that component without bothering with the internal details that produce the 
behavior.
 
 Abstraction is an indispensable part of the design process and it is essential for 
problem partitioning. Partitioning essentially is the exercise in determining 
the components of a system. However, these components are not isolated from 
each other, but interact with other components. In order to allow the designer 
to concentrate on one component at a time, abstraction of other components is 
used.
 
 Abstraction is used for existing components as well as components that are 
being designed. Abstraction of existing components plays an important role 
in the maintenance phase.
 
 During the design process, abstractions are used in a reverse manner not in 
the process of understanding a system. During design, the components do not 
exist, and in the design the designer specifies only the abstract specifications 
of the different components. The basic goal of system design is to specify the 
modules in a system and their abstractions. Once the different modules are 
specified, during the detailed design the designer can concentrate on one 
module at a time. The task in detailed design and implementation is essentially 
to implement the modules so that the abstract specifications of each module 
are satisfied.
 
 There are two common abstraction mechanisms for software systems: 
Functional abstraction and data abstraction. In functional abstraction, a 
module is specified by the function it performs. For example, a module to sort 
an input array can be represented by the specification of sorting. Functional 
abstraction is the basis of partitioning in function-oriented approaches. That 
is, when the problem is being partitioned, the overall transformation function 
for the system is partitioned into smaller functions that comprise the system 
function. 
 
 The second unit for abstraction is data abstraction. There are certain operations 
required from a data object, depending on the object and the environment 
in which it is used. Data abstraction supports this view. Data is not treated 
simply as objects, but is treated as objects with some predefined operations 
on them. The operations defined on a data object are the only operations that 
can be performed on those objects. From outside an object, the internals of the 
object are hidden; only the operations on the object are visible.
 
3. Top-down and Bottom-up Design. A system consists of components, which 
have components of their own; indeed a system is a hierarchy of components. 
The highest-level components correspond to the total system. 

\n== AGARWAL2010 p135 ==\n122 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
 
 To design such hierarchies there are two possible approaches: top-down and 
bottom-up. The top-down approach starts from the highest-level component 
of the hierarchy and proceeds through to lower levels. By contrast, a bottom-
up approach starts with the lowest-level component of the hierarchy and 
proceeds through progressively higher levels to the top-level component.
 
 A top-down design approach starts by identifying the major components 
of the system, decomposing them into their lower-level components and 
iterating until the desired level of detail is achieved. Top-down design 
methods often result in some form of stepwise refinement. Starting from an 
abstract design, in each step the design is refined to a more concrete level, 
until we reach a level where no more refinement is needed and the design can 
be implemented directly. The top-down approach has been promulgated by 
many researchers and has been found to be extremely useful for design. Most 
design methodologies are based on the top-down approach.
FIGURE 5.3 Top-Down Approach 
 
A bottom-up design approach starts with designing the most basic or primitive 
components and proceeds to higher-level components that use these lower-level 
components. Bottom-up methods work with layers of abstraction. Starting from the 
very bottom, operations that provide a layer of abstraction are implemented. The 
operations of this layer are then used to implement more powerful operations and 
still a higher layer of abstraction, until the stage is reached where the operations 
supported by the layer are those desired by the system.
 
A top-down approach is suitable only if the specifications of the system are clearly 
known and the system development is from scratch. However, if a system is to be 
built from an existing system, a bottom-up approach is more suitable, as it starts 
from some existing components. So, for example, if an iterative enhancement type 
of process is being followed, in later iterations, the bottom-up approach could be 
more suitable (in the first iteration a top-down approach can be used).

\n== AGARWAL2010 p136 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
123
FIGURE 5.4 Bottom-Up Approach
5.2 
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
 
Large systems are always decomposed into subsystems that provide some related 
set of services. The initial design process of identifying these subsystems and 
establishing a framework for subsystem control and communication is called 
architectural design.
 
 
Architectural design represents the structure of data and program components 
that are required to build a computer-based system. It considers the architectural 
style that the system will take, the structure and properties of the components that 
constitute the system, and the interrelationships that occur among all architectural 
components of a system.
 
 
Architectural design methods have a look into various architectural styles for 
designing a system. These are: 
 
 Data-centric architecture
 
 Data-flow architecture
 
 Object-oriented architecture
 
 Layered architecture
 
 
Data-centric architecture involves the use of a central database operation of 
inserting and updating it in the form of a table. Data-flow architecture is central 
around the pipe and filter mechanism. This architecture is applied when input data 
takes the form of output after passing through various phases of transformations. 
These transformations can be via manipulations or various computations done 

\n== AGARWAL2010 p137 ==\n124 
SOF TWARE ENGINEERING AND TESTING
on the data. In object-oriented architecture the software design moves around the 
clauses and objects of the system. The class encapsulates the data and methods. 
Layered architecture defines a number of layers and each layer performs tasks. 
The outer-most layer handles the functionality of the user interface and the inner-
most layer mainly handles interaction with the hardware.
5.2.1 
Objectives of Architectural Design
 
The objective of architectural design is to develop a model of software architecture, 
which gives an overall organization of the program module in the software 
product. Software architecture encompasses two aspects of structures of the data 
and hierarchical structures of the software components. Let us see how a single 
problem can be translated to a collection of solution domains (see Figure 5.5).
FIGURE 5.5 Problems, Solutions, and Architecture
 
 
Architectural design defines the organization of program components. It does 
not provide the details of each component and its implementation. Figure 5.6 
depicts the architecture of a financial accounting system.
FIGURE 5.6 Architecture of a Financial Accounting System

\n== AGARWAL2010 p138 ==\n 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
125
 
 
The objective of architectural design is also to control the relationship between 
modules. One module may control another module or may be controlled by 
another module. These characteristics are defined by the fan-in and fan-out of a 
particular module. The organization of a module can be represented by a tree-like 
structure.
 
 
The number of levels of a component in the structure is called depth and the 
number of components across the horizontal section is called width. The number 
of components, which controls the component, is called fan-in, i.e., the number of 
incoming edges to a component. The number of components that are controlled by 
the module is called fan-out, i.e., the number of outgoing edges.
FIGURE 5.7 Fan-in and Fan-out
 
 
S0 controls three components, hence, the fan-out is 3. S2 is controlled by two 
components, namely, S1 and S2, hence, the fan-in is 2 (see Figure 5.7).
5.3 
LOW-LEVEL DESIGN 
5.3.1 
Modularization
 
A system is considered modular if it consists of discreet components so that each 
component can be implemented separately, and a change to one component has 
minimal impact on other components.
 
 
There are many definitions of the term module.  They range from “a module is 
a FORTRAN subroutine” to “a module is an ADA package” to “a module is a work 
assignment for an individual programmer.” All of these definitions are correct, in 
the sense that modular systems incorporate collections of abstractions in which 
each functional abstraction, each data abstraction, and each control abstraction 
handles a local aspect of the problem being solved. Modular system consists of 
well-defined, manageable units with well-defined interfaces among the units. 
Desirable properties of a modular system include: 
 
 Each function in each abstraction has a single, well-defined purpose. 
 
 Each function manipulates no more than one major data structure.
